Add Builders-substrate-adding built in module article (#22)
moondance-labs/tanssi-docs: builders/build/substrate/adding-built-in-pallet.md

2. Make the standard (`std`) features of the module available to the compiler
3. Configure the module
4. Add the module to the runtime
5. Add default configuration in the chain specification

In the following example, the very popular Substrate module `pallet-assets` will be added to the runtime of the provided EVM template, found in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi){target=_blank}, specifically in the folder `container-chains/templates/frontier/`.

### Declare the dependency {: #declare-dependency }

Every package contains a manifest file named `Cargo.toml` stating, among other things, all the dependencies the package relies on, and the ContainerChain runtime is no exception. 

To declare the dependency and make it available to the runtime, open the `Cargo.toml` file located in the folder `runtime` with a text editor and add the module, referencing the code in the official repository of the Polkadot SDK:

```toml
[dependencies]
...
pallet-assets = { git = "https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk", branch = "master", default-features = false }
...
```

### Make the standard features available to the compiler {: #standard-features }

> In the `Cargo.toml` file there is a features section where the features from the module marked as standard must be added, to make them available to the compiler to build the runtime binary:

Reviewer: Also, always consider that you could share a URL to this specific section, so i tis always important to provide a bit more context hence I added the `located.....`

```toml
[features]
default = [
	"std",
]
std = [
	...,
	"pallet-assets/std",
   ...
]
```
### Configure the Module {: #configure-the-module }

> With the dependency declared, now the module can be configured and added to the runtime to use it. It is done in the `lib.rs` file that is located in the folder */runtime/src*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the dependency declared, now the module can be configured and added to the runtime to use it. To do so, you need to edit the `lib.rs` file that is located in the folder:

CODE SNIPPET 
 */runtime/src/lib.rs

```

```rust
...
parameter_types! {
	pub const AssetDeposit: Balance = 100;
	pub const ApprovalDeposit: Balance = 1;
	pub const StringLimit: u32 = 50;
	pub const MetadataDepositBase: Balance = 10;
	pub const MetadataDepositPerByte: Balance = 1;
}

impl pallet_assets::Config for Runtime {
	type RuntimeEvent = RuntimeEvent;
	type Balance = u128;
	type AssetId = u64;
	type AssetIdParameter = u64;
	type Currency = Balances;
	type CreateOrigin = frame_support::traits::AsEnsureOriginWithArg<frame_system::EnsureSigned<AccountId>>;
	type ForceOrigin = EnsureRoot<AccountId>;
	type AssetDeposit = AssetDeposit;
	type AssetAccountDeposit = frame_support::traits::ConstU128<1>;
	type MetadataDepositBase = MetadataDepositBase;
	type MetadataDepositPerByte = MetadataDepositPerByte;
	type ApprovalDeposit = ApprovalDeposit;
	type StringLimit = StringLimit;
	type Freezer = ();
	type Extra = ();
	type WeightInfo = pallet_assets::weights::SubstrateWeight<Runtime>;
	type RemoveItemsLimit = frame_support::traits::ConstU32<1000>;
	#[cfg(feature = "runtime-benchmarks")]
	type BenchmarkHelper = ();
   type CallbackHandle = ();
}
...
```

> It is important to note that every built-in module has a different purpose, and therefore, have different needs in term of what must be configured. 

Reviewer: I think it is important that you explain (at least as an example) what some of this configuration parameters are. Also you never explain what are the `parameter_types!` and what are the `impl pallet_assets::Config for Runtime {` - Remember that you have to write this more or less from the angle of someone who is not really familiar with this

Reviewer: I would explain what each thing is and then a few of the configurations

### Add the module to the runtime {: #add-module-to-runtime }

> In the same `lib.rs` file, located in the folder */runtime/src* there is a section enclosed in the macro 'construct_runtime!()', this is where the pallet must be added to make the compiler include it within the runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the same `lib.rs` file referenced in the previous section, there is a segment enclosed in the macro 'construct_runtime!()', this is where the pallet must be added to make the compiler include it within the runtime:
```

```rust
construct_runtime!(
   pub enum Runtime where
      Block = Block,
      NodeBlock = opaque::Block,
      UncheckedExtrinsic = UncheckedExtrinsic,
   {
      // System support stuff.
      System: frame_system = 0,
      ParachainSystem: cumulus_pallet_parachain_system = 1,
      Timestamp: pallet_timestamp = 2,
      ParachainInfo: parachain_info = 3,
      Sudo: pallet_sudo = 4,
      Utility: pallet_utility = 5,
      ...
      Balances: pallet_balances = 10,

>       Assets: pallet_assets = 11,

Reviewer: Also, you could mentioned in the previous paragraph, that this particular runtime already had a few pallets like: balances, timestmap, utility etc

      ...
   }
```

### Configure the Module in the Chain Specification {: #configure-chain-specs }

Finally, add the default configuration in the chain specification for the genesis, in the file `chain_spec` located in `container-chains/templates/frontier/node/src`

> ```rust

Reviewer: Explain a bit more this code snippet

---

> title: Basic Substrate

Reviewer 2: maybe "Adding Built-in Substrate Modules"?

description: Substrate is a modular blockchain framework that includes many ready-to-use modules covering a wide range of common functionalities to include in your runtime.
---

# Adding a Built-In Module {: #adding-builtin-module } 

## Introduction {: #introduction }

Substrate is a powerful and modular software development framework included in the Polkadot SDKs for building blockchains. It provides a comprehensive set of tools and libraries that abstract complex blockchain functionalities, allowing developers to focus on building innovative features and applications by focusing on the runtime, which contains the core logic and the rules of the state transition for the use case. 

What sets Substrate apart is its modular architecture, which enables the seamless integration of pre-built modules and the creation of custom ones, facilitating the development of blockchain protocols. 

> If the use case requires only EVM (Ethereum virtual machine) compatibility, then the provided template included in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi#container-chain-templates){target=_blank} will meet the requirements and need no additional changes, but, teams willing to build a Substrate Appchain will need to add and compose the built-in modules and the custom-made ones into the runtime, compile and generate the chain specification and, finally, deploying through Tanssi protocol to evolve into a live ContainerChain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the use case requires only EVM (Ethereum virtual machine) compatibility, then the provided template included in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi#container-chain-templates){target=_blank} will meet the requirements and need no additional changes, but teams willing to build a Substrate Appchain will need to add and compose the built-in modules and the custom-made ones into the runtime, compile and generate the chain specification, and, finally, deploy through the Tanssi protocol to evolve into a live ContainerChain.
```

In this article, the necessary steps involved when adding a built-in module are covered.

## Adding a Built-in Module to the Runtime {: #adding-a-built-in-module }

> As introduced in the [modularity](/learn/framework/modules) article, the Substrate framework already includes many built-in modules addressing a wide range of functionalities ready to use in your runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As introduced in the [modularity](/learn/framework/modules) article, the Substrate framework already includes many built-in modules addressing a wide range of functionalities, ready to be used in your runtime.
```

> Modules are meant to provide the functionality needed in very different use cases such as DeFi, NFTs, or any other, and, therefore, they are basic building blocks inherently abstract that can be configured according to the specific needs of the Appchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modules are meant to provide the functionality needed in very different use cases such as DeFi, NFTs, or any other, and, therefore, they are basic building blocks that are inherently abstract and can be configured according to the specific needs of the Appchain.
```

To add a module, the following steps are necessary:

1. Make the dependency available within the project by declaring it in [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/){target=_blank}, the Rust language package manager
2. Make the standard (`std`) features of the module available to the compiler
3. Configure the module
4. Add the module to the runtime

> 5. Add default configuration in the chain specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Add the default configuration to the chain specification
```

In the following example, the very popular Substrate module `pallet-assets` will be added to the runtime of the provided EVM template, found in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi){target=_blank}, specifically in the folder `container-chains/templates/frontier/`.

> ### Declare the dependency {: #declare-dependency }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Declare the Dependency {: #declare-dependency }
```

Every package contains a manifest file named `Cargo.toml` stating, among other things, all the dependencies the package relies on, and the ContainerChain runtime is no exception. 

To declare the dependency and make it available to the runtime, open the `Cargo.toml` file located in the folder `runtime` with a text editor and add the module, referencing the code in the official repository of the Polkadot SDK:

```toml
[dependencies]
...

> pallet-assets = { git = "https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk", branch = "master", default-features = false }

Reviewer 2: is there a toml formatter for this so it isn't so long? i like to try to avoid having code snippets with horizontal scrollbars

Author: toml format loves long lines :)

...
```

> ### Make the standard features available to the compiler {: #standard-features }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Make the Standard Features Available to the Compiler {: #standard-features }
```

In Cargo, the “features” flags provide a mechanism to tell the compiler to include or leave out certain portions of code, which is a useful mechanism to optimize compile time, minimize binary file sizes, or disable certain behavior (for example, not including unit testing or benchmarking functionality in the runtime intended for production). 

> To compile the standard features for the Assets module within the runtime, the same `Cargo.toml` file located in the `runtime` folder must be edited, enabling the flag. Everything listed in this section will ensure that it is available to the compiler when building the runtime binary, which is ultimately the file that contains all the information to run (initially) your ContainerChain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To compile the standard features for the Assets module within the runtime, the same `Cargo.toml` file in the `runtime` folder must be edited, enabling the flag. Everything listed in this section will ensure that it is available to the compiler when building the runtime binary, which is ultimately the file containing all the information to run your ContainerChain initially.
```

```toml
[features]
default = [
	"std",
]
std = [
	...,
	"pallet-assets/std",
   ...
]
```
### Configure the Module {: #configure-the-module }

> With the dependency declared in the project, now the module can be configured and added to the runtime to be used. To do so, you need to edit the `lib.rs` file that is located at:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the dependency declared in the project, the module can now be configured and added to the runtime to be used. To do so, you need to edit the `lib.rs` file that is located at:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```text
```

*/runtime/src/lib.rs
```

The configuration of new modules requires implementing a configuration `trait` for the module (in this example, for Assets) in the runtime, expressed in Rust as follows:

```rust
// Implements pallet_assets::Config trait in the runtime
impl pallet_assets::Config for Runtime { ... }
```

> [Traits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html){target=_blank} are a way of defining shared behavior in Rust, and in this case, they allow a new runtime to benefit from the functionality the Assets module provides, only by implementing its configuration trait and parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Traits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html){target=_blank} are a way of defining shared behavior in Rust, and in this case, they allow a new runtime to benefit from the functionality the Assets module provides only by implementing its configuration trait and parameters.
```

When defining constant values for a module, they have to be enclosed within the macro `parameter_types!`, which helps us to reduce the development effort by expanding the code and converting each of the parameters into the correct struct type with functions that allow the runtime to read its type and values in a standardized way.

> It is important to note that every built-in module has a different purpose and, therefore, each of them has different needs in terms of the parameters that must be configured. In the case of the Assets module, the following code snippet shows a basic example of how to configure it with types, constants and default values. However, these values must be carefully adjusted to the specific requirements of the use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to note that every built-in module has a different purpose, and, therefore, each of them has different needs in terms of the parameters that must be configured. In the case of the Assets module, the following code snippet shows a basic example of how to configure it with types, constants, and default values. However, these values must be carefully adjusted to the specific requirements of the use case.
```

In this example, some parameters have a description attached. For a detailed description of each parameter, refer to the [official config trait for the Assets module documentation](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_assets/pallet/trait.Config.html){target=_blank}.

```rust
...

> parameter_types! {

Reviewer 2: this snippet also has a horizontal scrollbar

impl pallet_assets::Config for Runtime {
	type RuntimeEvent = RuntimeEvent;
   // Stores the balances in an unsigned integer of 128bits
	type Balance = u128;
   // The id of an asset can be defined as an unsigned integer of 64 bits
	type AssetId = u64;
	type AssetIdParameter = u64;
   // Uses module Balances as mechanism for currency operations
	type Currency = Balances;
   // Defines the allowed origins to create assets
	type CreateOrigin = frame_support::traits::AsEnsureOriginWithArg<frame_system::EnsureSigned<AccountId>>;
   // Root can create assets
	type ForceOrigin = EnsureRoot<AccountId>;
	type AssetDeposit = AssetDeposit;
	type AssetAccountDeposit = frame_support::traits::ConstU128<1>;
	type MetadataDepositBase = MetadataDepositBase;
	type MetadataDepositPerByte = MetadataDepositPerByte;
	type ApprovalDeposit = ApprovalDeposit;
	type StringLimit = StringLimit;
	type Freezer = ();
	type Extra = ();
	type WeightInfo = pallet_assets::weights::SubstrateWeight<Runtime>;
	type RemoveItemsLimit = frame_support::traits::ConstU32<1000>;
	#[cfg(feature = "runtime-benchmarks")]
	type BenchmarkHelper = ();
   type CallbackHandle = ();
}
...
```

> ### Add the module to the runtime {: #add-module-to-runtime }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Add the Module to the Runtime {: #add-module-to-runtime }
```

> In the same `lib.rs` file referenced in the previous section, there is a segment enclosed in the macro 'construct_runtime!()', this is where the pallet must be added to be included within the runtime. Since the example is based on the EVM template, the runtime is already configured to include many modules, including the modules for system support, the modules to add the Ethereum compatibility layer, the modules to support the Tanssi protocol, balances, and now, also Assets:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the same `lib.rs` file referenced in the previous section, there is a segment enclosed in the macro 'construct_runtime!()'. This is where the pallet must be added to be included in the runtime. Since the example is based on the EVM template, the runtime is already configured to include many modules, including the modules for system support, the modules to add the Ethereum compatibility layer, the modules to support the Tanssi protocol, balances, and now also Assets:
```

```rust
construct_runtime!(
   pub enum Runtime where
      Block = Block,
      NodeBlock = opaque::Block,
      UncheckedExtrinsic = UncheckedExtrinsic,
   {
      // System support stuff.
      System: frame_system = 0,
      ParachainSystem: cumulus_pallet_parachain_system = 1,
      Timestamp: pallet_timestamp = 2,
      ParachainInfo: parachain_info = 3,
      Sudo: pallet_sudo = 4,
      Utility: pallet_utility = 5,
      ...
      Balances: pallet_balances = 10,
      // Assets module is added here
      Assets: pallet_assets = 11,
      ...
   }
```

### Configure the Module in the Chain Specification {: #configure-chain-specs }

> Finally, add the configuration in the chain specification for the genesis state, in the file `chain_spec.rs` located at:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, add the configuration in the chain specification for the genesis state in the file `chain_spec.rs` located at:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```text
```

*/node/src/chain_spec.rs
```

The function `testnet_genesis`, presented in the following code snippet, defines the initial state for the modules included in the runtime (such as initial funded accounts, for example). After adding the Assets module, it is necessary to initialize it as well, and in the following example, its default values are defined.

More about the chain specification and how to configure it will be covered in the article [Modifying Your ContainerChain](/builders/build/modifying).

```rust
fn testnet_genesis(
   endowed_accounts: Vec<AccountId>,
   id: ParaId,
   root_key: AccountId,
) -> container_chain_template_frontier_runtime::GenesisConfig {
   container_chain_template_frontier_runtime::GenesisConfig {
      system: container_chain_template_frontier_runtime::SystemConfig {
         code: container_chain_template_frontier_runtime::WASM_BINARY
               .expect("WASM binary was not build, please build it!")
               .to_vec(),
      },
      ...
      // Add the default state for this module in the genesis state
      assets: Default::default()
      ...
   }
}
```

> With the module included, this new runtime version has unlocked a new set of functionalities ready to be composed with even more of the Substrate built-in modules or the custom-made ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the module included, this new runtime version has unlocked a new set of functionalities ready to be composed with even more of the Substrate built-in modules or custom-made ones.
```

---
title: Adding Built-in Substrate Modules
description: Substrate is a modular blockchain framework that includes many ready-to-use modules covering a wide range of common functionalities to include in your runtime.
---

> # Adding a Built-In Module {: #adding-builtin-module } 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Adding a Built-in Module {: #adding-builtin-module } 
```

## Introduction {: #introduction }

Substrate is a powerful and modular software development framework included in the Polkadot SDKs for building blockchains. It provides a comprehensive set of tools and libraries that abstract complex blockchain functionalities, allowing developers to focus on building innovative features and applications by focusing on the runtime, which contains the core logic and the rules of the state transition for the use case. 

What sets Substrate apart is its modular architecture, which enables the seamless integration of pre-built modules and the creation of custom ones, facilitating the development of blockchain protocols. 

> If the use case requires only EVM (Ethereum virtual machine) compatibility, then the provided template included in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi#container-chain-templates){target=_blank} will meet the requirements and need no additional changes, but teams willing to build a Substrate Appchain will need to add and compose the built-in modules and the custom-made ones into the runtime, compile and generate the chain specification, and, finally, deploy through the Tanssi protocol to evolve into a live ContainerChain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For cases requiring only EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) compatibility, the template provided in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi#container-chain-templates){target=\_blank} fulfills the requirements without further modifications. However, teams aiming to build a Substrate Appchain must add and configure both built-in and custom modules within the runtime. This involves compiling, generating the chain specification, and deploying through the Tanssi protocol to transform into a live ContainerChain.
```

> In this article, the necessary steps involved when adding a built-in module are covered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article focuses on the necessary steps for adding a built-in module.
```

## Adding a Built-in Module to the Runtime {: #adding-a-built-in-module-to-runtime }

As introduced in the [modularity](/learn/framework/modules) article, the Substrate framework already includes many built-in modules addressing a wide range of functionalities, ready to be used in your runtime.

Modules are meant to provide the functionality needed in very different use cases such as DeFi, NFTs, or any other, and, therefore, they are basic building blocks that are inherently abstract and can be configured according to the specific needs of the Appchain.

To add a module, the following steps are necessary:

1. Make the dependency available within the project by declaring it in [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/){target=_blank}, the Rust language package manager
2. Make the standard (`std`) features of the module available to the compiler
3. Configure the module
4. Add the module to the runtime
5. Add the default configuration to the chain specification

> In the following example, the very popular Substrate module `pallet-assets` will be added to the runtime of the provided EVM template, found in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi){target=_blank}, specifically in the folder `container-chains/templates/frontier/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the popular Substrate module `pallet-assets` is added to the runtime of the provided EVM template, found in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi){target=_blank}, specifically in the folder `container-chains/templates/frontier/`.
```

### Declare the Dependency {: #declare-dependency }

Every package contains a manifest file named `Cargo.toml` stating, among other things, all the dependencies the package relies on, and the ContainerChain runtime is no exception. 

> To declare the dependency and make it available to the runtime, open the `Cargo.toml` file located in the folder `runtime` with a text editor and add the module, referencing the code in the official repository of the Polkadot SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the first step, is to declare the dependency and make it available to the runtime, open the `Cargo.toml` file located in the folder `runtime` with a text editor and add the module, referencing the code in the official repository of the Polkadot SDK:
```

```rust
// Implementing the Assets config trait for the runtime
impl pallet_assets::Config for Runtime {
   
   // Stores the balances in an unsigned integer of 128bits
	type Balance = u128;
   // The id of an asset can be defined as an unsigned integer of 64 bits
	type AssetId = u64;
   // Uses module Balances as mechanism for currency operations
	type Currency = Balances;

   // Configure the module by referencing the previously
   // defined constants

	type AssetDeposit = AssetDeposit;
	type MetadataDepositBase = MetadataDepositBase;
	type MetadataDepositPerByte = MetadataDepositPerByte;
	type ApprovalDeposit = ApprovalDeposit;
	type StringLimit = StringLimit;
   
   // More configuration
   ...
}
```

??? code "View the complete script"

    ```rust
    --8<-- 'code/basic-substrate/built-in-pallet-configuration.rs'
    ```

The complete configuration of the module contains more parameters, to view a detailed description of each of them, refer to the [official config trait for the Assets module documentation](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_assets/pallet/trait.Config.html){target=_blank}.

### Add the Module to the Runtime {: #add-module-to-runtime }

> In the same `lib.rs` file referenced in the previous section, there is a segment enclosed in the macro 'construct_runtime!()'. This is where the pallet must be added to be included in the runtime. Since the example is based on the EVM template, the runtime is already configured to include many modules, including the modules for system support, the modules to add the Ethereum compatibility layer, the modules to support the Tanssi protocol, balances, and now also Assets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the same `lib.rs` file referenced in the previous section, there is a segment enclosed in the macro `construct_runtime!()`. This is where the pallet must be added to be included in the runtime. Since the example is based on the EVM template, the runtime is already configured to include many modules, including the modules for system support, the modules to add the Ethereum compatibility layer, the modules to support the Tanssi protocol, balances, and now also Assets:
```
